Marie Lynn Miranda (born 1962/1963) is an American economist, data scientist, and academic administrator serving as the tenth chancellor of the University of Illinois Chicago and a vice president of the University of Illinois System since 2023. She was previously the provost and a professor of applied computational mathematics and statistics at the University of Notre Dame. A self-taught toxicologist and environmental scientist, Miranda researches children's environmental health and geospatial health informatics.


== Life and career ==
Miranda was born in 1962 or 1963. She is the first member of her family to be born in the United States. In 1961, her parents and three brothers moved to South Bend, Indiana from Goa while her father Constancio Miranda was studying civil engineering. He was later a professor at the University of Detroit Mercy. She attended Catholic schools in Detroit. Miranda earned a A.B. in mathematics and economics, summa cum laude, from Duke University in 1985. She was inducted into Phi Beta Kappa. While attending Duke University, she worked as a student manager of the Duke Blue Devils men's basketball under coach Mike Krzyzewski. Miranda earned a M.A. (1988) and Ph.D. in economics from Harvard University. Her 1990 dissertation was titled, Essays on Land Management. Peter Timmer, Lawrence Goulder, and Jerry Green served on her doctoral committee.
Miranda joined the faculty at Duke University in 1990. She is a self-taught toxicologist and environmental scientist and joined Duke's integrated toxicology and environmental health program in 1999. Miranda was the founding director of the Children's Environmental Health Initiative. For nine years, she was the director of undergraduate programs for the Nicholas School of the Environment. She is researches geospatial health informatics. From 2012 to 2015, Miranda was Samuel A. Graham dean of the school of natural resources and environment at University of Michigan. With a quantitative methods background, she was a professor of pediatrics and obstetrics and gynaecology at the Michigan Medicine.
Miranda was the Howard R. Hughes Provost and professor of statistics at Rice University from 2015 to 2019.  In 2019, she was elected a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. From July 1, 2020, to 2023, Miranda was the Charles and Jill Fischer Provost of the University of Notre Dame and a professor of applied computational mathematics and statistics. She succeeded Thomas G. Burish to become was the first woman and person of color to serve in the position. In July 2023, Miranda became the tenth chancellor of the University of Illinois Chicago. She is also a vice president of the University of Illinois System.
Miranda is married to Christopher Geron. They have three children.


== See also ==
List of women in mathematics


== References ==