Dorit Aharonov (Hebrew: דורית אהרונוב; born 1970) is an Israeli computer scientist specializing in quantum computing.
Aharonov was born in Washington and grew up in Haifa, the daughter of the mathematician Dov Aharonov and the niece of the physicist Yakir Aharonov.
Aharonov graduated from Weizmann Institute of Science with an MSc in physics. She received her doctorate for Computer Science in 1999 from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, and her thesis was entitled Noisy Quantum Computation. She also did her post-doctorate in the mathematics department of Princeton University and in the computer science department of University of California Berkeley. She was a visiting scholar at the Institute for Advanced Study in 1998–99.
Aharonov has won several awards for her research work. In 2005 she was chosen by Nature magazine as one of the four "most prominent young theorists in their field", and the following year she was awarded the Creel Prize for excellence in scientific research.
Aharonov was an invited speaker in International Congress of Mathematicians 2010, Hyderabad on the topic of "Mathematical Aspects of Computer Science".
She was elected a Member of the National Academy of Sciences in 2024.


== Research ==
Aharonov's research is mainly about quantum information processes, which includes:

quantum algorithms
quantum cryptography and computational complexity
quantum error corrections and fault tolerance
connections between quantum computation and quantum Markov chains and lattices
quantum Hamiltonian complexity and its connections to condensed matter physics
transition from quantum to classical physics
understanding entanglement by studying quantum complexity


== Honors and awards ==
2006 - Krill Prize for Excellence in Scientific Research
2014 - the Michael Bruno Memorial Award
2024 - elected Member of the National Academy of Sciences


== References ==


== External links ==
Aharonov's home page at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Profile in Nature
Dorit Aharonov in panel discussion, "Harnessing Quantum Physics" with Michele Mosca, Avi Wigderson, Daniel Gottesman, Peter Shor, and Ignacio Cirac.